Cloud SIEM custom detection rules Cdocsification (#35279)
DataDog/documentation: hugo/content/en/security/cloud_siem/detect_and_monitor/custom_detection_rules/create_rule/_index.mdoc.md

  - trait_id: cloud_siem_detection_sequence_rule_query_language
    option_group_id: cloud_siem_detection_sequence_rule_query_language_options
    show_if:
      - cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method: ["sequence"]
  - trait_id: cloud_siem_detection_signal_correlation_rule_query_language
    option_group_id: cloud_siem_detection_signal_correlation_rule_query_language_options
    show_if:
      - cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method: ["signal_correlation"]
  - trait_id: cloud_siem_detection_rule_query_language
    option_group_id: cloud_siem_detection_rule_event_query_only_language_options
    hide_if:
      - cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method: ["threshold","signal_correlation","sequence"]
aliases:
- /security/cloud_siem/detect_and_monitor/custom_detection_rules/create_rule/real_time_rule
- /security/cloud_siem/detect_and_monitor/custom_detection_rules/create_rule/scheduled_rule
- /security/cloud_siem/detect_and_monitor/custom_detection_rules/create_rule/historical_job
- /security/cloud_siem/detect_and_monitor/custom_detection_rules/signal_correlation_rules
---

## Overview

### Understand rule creation options

> Before creating a rule, you have to choose three options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before creating a rule, you must choose three options:
```

{% collapse-content title="Detection method" level="h4" expanded=false id="detection-methods" %}
The event to monitor for:

**Threshold**

> : Define a query for the activity you want to detect. Then, configure how many matches should generate a signal: set the threshold to 1 for signature-based detections, or use a higher value to alert on patterns of repeated activity. This is the most common starting point when building a new rule.

Reviewer: updating this instructional voice to match the rest of the list, which describes what the method does
```suggestion
: Detects when a query for a specific activity occurs a number of times you define. Set the threshold to 1 for signature-based detections, or use a higher value to alert on patterns of alerted activity. This is the most common starting point when building a rule.
```

**New Value**
: Triggers when one or more tracked attributes take on a value not seen during the learning period; for example, an account logging in from a country, IP, and device it's never used before.

**Anomaly**

> : Detects unexpected spikes or upward shifts, but not drop-offs, in log activity, accounting for daily and weekly seasonality. An example detection could be a spike in outbound traffic from a database server at 2 pm, far outside its normal nightly backup window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Detects unexpected spikes or upward shifts, but not drop-offs, in log activity, accounting for daily and weekly seasonality. An example detection could be a spike in outbound traffic from a database server at 2 PM, far outside its normal nightly backup window.
```

{% /collapse-content %}
{% collapse-content title="Query language" level="h4" expanded=false id="query-languages" %}
The language used to write your query:

**Event query**
: Depending on the detection method and rule type, you can create detections based on data in logs, audit trails, events, RUM, signals, or rules.

**SQL**
: Use SQL syntax to write detection rules using [DDSQL][5] that are compatible with datasets.

**Event/rule query**
: If you select the Sequence detection method, for each step in the sequence, you can query logs using either events or rules.
{% /collapse-content %}

The options you choose impact the steps required to create the rule. Use the filters at the top of this page to specify your rule creation options, so the relevant instructions populate on the rest of the page.

{% table %}
* **Detection method**

> * **Rule Types** {% colspan=3 %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Rule types** {% colspan=3 %}
```

* **Threshold**
* Event query
* Event query, SQL {% colspan=2 %}
---
* **New Value**
* Event query {% rowspan=5 %} {% colspan=3 %}
---
* **Anomaly**
---
* **Content anomaly**
---
* **Impossible travel**
---
* **Third party**
---
* **Sequence**
* Event/rule query
* *Not supported*
* Event/rule query
---
* **Signal correlation**
* Rule query {% colspan=2 %}
* *Not supported*
{% /table %}

If you're getting started, you can click these links to automatically apply common filter combinations to this page:
- [Threshold/Real-time rule/Event query](?cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method=threshold&cloud_siem_detection_rule_type=real_time_rule&cloud_siem_detection_threshold_rule_query_language=event_query)
- [Threshold/Scheduled rule/SQL](?cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method=threshold&cloud_siem_detection_rule_type=scheduled_rule&cloud_siem_detection_threshold_sql_rule_query_language=sql)
- [Threshold/Historical job/SQL](?cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method=threshold&cloud_siem_detection_rule_type=historical_job&cloud_siem_detection_threshold_sql_rule_query_language=sql)

## Create a rule

1. To create a detection rule, navigate to the [Create a New Detection][2] page.

> 1. {% if equals($cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method, "threshold") %}Select the **Threshold** detection method.{% /if %}<!-- Steps to select search query type. Comments have to go back here to not interfere with the formatting! Ain't that a kick in the pants -->

Reviewer: i don't know if this was an easter egg or placeholder, but claude didn't appreciate this, lol.
```suggestion
1. {% if equals($cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method, "threshold") %}Select the **Threshold** detection method.{% /if %}<!-- Steps to select search query type. Comments must stay inline to avoid breaking list formatting.-->
```

### Add step

1. To search a different data type, click the down arrow next to **Logs** and select **Signals** or **Rules**.
1. Define the condition for the step.
    - **Logs**: Construct a search query using the [Log Explorer search syntax][1].
    - **Signals**: Reference an existing rule or query on signal fields.
    - **Rules**: Select a rule.
1. Set **group by** fields (for example, `@usr.email` or `@ip.address`) to link entities across steps.
1. Enter a threshold condition, such as `>10`.
1. If you want to use another query, connect this query with the next query using `AND` or `OR` and repeat steps 1-4.
1. In the **roll-up over** dropdown menu, select the time frame all queries in that step must occur to transition to the next step.

### Define step transitions

For the current step and the next step:

1. In the **within** dropdown menu, select an evaluation window for the transition.
   {% alert level="info" %}
   The total evaluation time across the sequence can be up to 24 hours.
   {% /alert %}
1. Follow the instructions in [Add step](#add-step) to complete the step.
   {% alert level="info" %}

>    You can select different `group by` fields between steps. For example, link `@usr.email`from an earlier step to `@ip.address` in a later step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can select different `group by` fields between steps. For example, link `@usr.email` from an earlier step to `@ip.address` in a later step.
```

### Add step

1. To search a different data type, click the down arrow next to **Logs** and select **Signals** or **Rules**.
1. Define the condition for the step.
    - **Logs**: Construct a search query using the [Log Explorer search syntax][1].
    - **Signals**: Reference an existing rule or query on signal fields.
    - **Rules**: Select a rule.
1. Set **group by** fields (for example, `@usr.email` or `@ip.address`) to link entities across steps.
1. Enter a threshold condition, such as `>10`.
1. If you want to use another query, connect this query with the next query using `AND` or `OR` and repeat steps 1-4.
1. In the **roll-up over** dropdown menu, select the time frame all queries in that step must occur to transition to the next step.

### Define step transitions

For the current step and the next step:

1. In the **within** dropdown menu, select an evaluation window for the transition.
   {% alert level="info" %}
   The total evaluation time across the sequence can be up to 24 hours.
   {% /alert %}
1. Follow the instructions in [Add step](#add-step) to complete the step.
   {% alert level="info" %}

>    You can select different `group by` fields between steps. For example, link `@usr.email`from an earlier step to `@ip.address` in a later step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can select different `group by` fields between steps. For example, link `@usr.email` from an earlier step to `@ip.address` in a later step.
```

{% /if %}

<!-- Real-time rule AND new value -->
{% if and(equals($cloud_siem_detection_rule_type, "real_time_rule"),equals($cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method, "new_value")) %}
{% img src="security/security_monitoring/detection_rules/severity_notification.png" alt="Set your severity and notification recipients" style="width:100%;" /%}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/set_conditions_severity_notify_only.mdoc.md" /%}

### Other parameters

#### Forget value {% #forget-value-rt-new-value %}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/forget_value.mdoc.md" /%}

#### Rule multi-triggering behavior {% #rule-multi-triggering-rt-new-value %}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/rule_multi_triggering.mdoc.md" /%}

#### Decrease severity for non-production environments {% #decrease-severity-new-value %}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/enable_decrease_severity.mdoc.md" /%}

#### Enable optional group by {% #enable-group-by-rt-new-value %}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/enable_group_by.mdoc.md" /%}

#### Group signals {% #group-signals-rt-new-value %}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/group_signals.mdoc.md" /%}

> #### Enable instantaneous baseline {% #enable-instantaneous-baseline-new-value %}

Reviewer: Claude is pointing out that lines 680-682 have been moved to a section it doesn't belong (Real-time rule + New value) and missing from sections where it's needed (Scheduled + New value after line 869) and (Historical + New value after line 1034). I'm not sure if this change was intentional, but I checked the current docs and see that this particular section is indeed in Scheduled + New value and Historical + New value, but not Real-time + New value.

Author: Thanks so much for flagging! I just double-checked this one in the UI and it matches what's there, so I think this discrepancy was due to a product update. (Can you tell it's been a long time since the first draft 😅)

{% img src="security/security_monitoring/detection_rules/set_condition_root_query.png" alt="Set your conditions, severity, and notification recipients" style="width:100%;" /%}

1. (Optional) Click the pencil icon next to **Condition 1** if you want to rename the condition. This name is appended to the rule name when a signal is generated.
1. In the **Query** field, enter the tags of a log that you want to trigger a signal.
    - For example, if you want logs with the tag `dev:demo` to trigger signals with a severity of `INFO`, enter `dev:demo` in the query field. Similarly, if you want logs with the tag `dev:prod` to trigger signals with a severity of `MEDIUM`, enter `dev:prod` in the query field.

### Other parameters

#### Enable optional group by {% #enable-group-by-historical-third-party %}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/enable_group_by.mdoc.md" /%}

#### Group signals {% #group-signals-historical-third-party %}

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/group_signals.mdoc.md" /%}
{% /if %}

<!-- Historical job AND sequence -->
{% if and(equals($cloud_siem_detection_rule_type, "historical_job"),equals($cloud_siem_detection_rule_detection_method, "sequence")) %}

> #### Rule multi-triggering {% #rule-multi-triggering-rt-sequence %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Rule multi-triggering {% #rule-multi-triggering-historical-sequence %}
```

> {% partial file="security/cloud_siem/rule_multi_triggering.mdoc.md" /%}

Reviewer: claude said that this section wouldn't apply to historical+sequence
```suggestion
{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/job_multi_triggering.mdoc.md" /%}
```

> #### Decrease severity for non-production environments {% #decrease-severity-rt-sequence %}

Reviewer: claude also said this section wouldn't make sense for historical, because they are one-time backtests against past data, not ongoing rules that generate live signals to de-prioritize. but obv defer to your expertise!

```suggestion
```

> {% partial file="security/cloud_siem/enable_decrease_severity.mdoc.md" /%}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> #### Enable optional group by {% #enable-group-by-rt-sequence %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Enable optional group by {% #enable-group-by-historical-sequence %}
```

{% partial file="security/cloud_siem/enable_group_by.mdoc.md" /%}

> #### Group signals {% #group-signals-rt-sequence %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Group signals {% #group-signals-historical-sequence %}
```
